in this video we are going to continue
building our CD pipeline by testing the
web application and deploying to a
staging environment this video is mainly
practical as we will expand the CD
pipeline we started building in the
previous video in particular we'll add a
unit test to test the Python code of the
web application deploy the application
to a staging environment and test the
successful deployments to both the
development and staging environments via
user acceptance test in the demo part of
this video we are going to add stages to
the jenkins file in order to test the
python code with unit tests test the
deployment to the development and
staging environments with user
acceptance tests deploy to a staging
environment on localhost using a
different pool we will also write a
simple unit test in Python and the user
acceptance test them so that we can run
these tests in the relevant stages
without any further ado let's start with
the Jenkins file this is the Jenkins
file from the previous video with some
additional stages in particular I added
a stage test unit test which invokes the
function run unit tests and the stage
test UAT dev straight after the
deployment to the dev environment this
stage invokes the function run UAT to
run user acceptance tests on the
development environment finally I added
the stage deploy stage which invokes the
function deploy and another stage run
UAT stage calling the function run UAT
to run acceptance tests on the staging
environment as you can see we now have
six stages in our CD pipeline let's
start by analyzing the stage test unit
tests first notice that outside the
stage is directive we added an
environment directive this allows to
inject an environment variable into all
the stage
of the pipeline in particular here we
added the environment variable
pythonpath
this is a variable to make Python
modules available from import from any
Python script we set the Python path to
the directory where our file app dot PI
is stored inside the workspace in fact
when the code is pulled from github it
is automatically stored by Jenkins
inside the workspace we need a reference
to app dot pi so that we can import it
inside the unit test using the Python
path we will see this in a minute so we
create a stage test unit test which
contains a step invoking the function
run unit tests let's have a look at this
function
the function run unit tests contain a
shell command executing a Python test
called test flask up dot pi and stored
in the test directory let's analyze the
unit test test flask up dot pi this is a
simple Python test for our flask
application it imports some Python
modules namely unique tests for writing
unit tests in Python it also imports our
upper module this is the flask
application we wrote in the previous
videos this is the reason why we had to
set up the environment variable Python
path in the Jenkins file without Python
path this unit test won't be able to
find the flask application and execute a
test on it these lines define the class
basic test which is used to write tests
using the unit test framework in
particular we have a setup method that
is executed before each test to mock a
flask application the teardown method is
executed after each test these are
common methods in testing frameworks and
they used to initialize mock objects or
tasks and clean up the environment after
a test is executed the real test is
defined in the method tests the main
page this method gets the mocked flask
application and checks that the root of
the application see the slash returns a
200 HTTP status code in other words the
tester pings a mocked version of the
application and makes sure that the page
is found finally the main method starts
the unit tests as you can see it is a
simple unit test but it fits our purpose
to test the application before the
pipeline builds it and deploys it to an
environment now let's go
to the Jenkins file
once the stage tests the unit tests
passes successfully the pipeline builds
the application and deploys it to the
dev environment we saw these steps in
the previous video after deployment to
death we add the stage test UAT dev this
invokes the function run the u18 and
passes the port where the dev
environment is deployed 8888 let's
analyze the function run UAT the
function receives the port as a
parameter and executes this shell
command this is a bash script named run
ua t dot s age and stored in the tests
directory the port is passed to the bash
script let's look at the bash script run
you $80 H stored in the test directory
this is a simple bash script that runs a
user acceptance test as you may remember
from section 3 a user acceptance test
checks that the feature or a use case is
correctly implemented this is also known
as an end-to-end test because it tests
that something works without caring too
much about how it works internally in
this case we are testing that the
environment deployed on localhost at a
given port is reachable let's analyze
the user acceptance test line by line
these lines said the variables hostname
and port hostname defaults to localhost
as we are developing on our local
machine the port is passed as an
argument to the shell script and it is
accessed using dollar one in bash this
means the first argument passed to the
script the port number in our case for
sake of simplicity we assume that only
one argument is passed and it is a
numeric value to make the code more
robust we will need to check this
assumption with some input checking it
is a good practice to assume that the
input could be incorrect
in this line we wait five seconds I
noticed that the flask application may
take few seconds to be fully up and
running after deployment and sometimes
this test failed simply because the
flask application wasn't yet ready this
line runs a curl command that thinks the
host name at the given port and returns
the HTTP status code of the request
the HTTP status code is stored in the
variable status underscore code
in the if-then-else block we checked
that the status code equals to 200 which
is the HTTP code for page found if so
the test passes if not the test fails
and both the bash script and the
pipeline stop now let's go back to the
Jenkins file the following step is
deploy stage this invokes the function
deploy we used in the previous video but
this time it passes the string stage as
value of the environment let's see how
to extend the function deploy in the
function deploy we add an else if block
that catches the condition environment
equals stage and assigns other in values
to the variables contain a name and port
this allows to start another container
with the same docker image that deployed
to a different port 88 in fact with a
different container name up on the
school stage as you can see the rest of
the function deploy is as in the
previous video let's go back to the
Jenkins file to see the last step we add
another stage test UAT stage but this
time we run user acceptance tests
against port 88 which is the port where
the staging environment is deployed
now let's go to Jenkins and amend the
configuration of the pipeline job we
started in the previous video click on
the pipeline job and on configure
go to pipeline scroll down and under
script path amend the name of the
Jenkins file - Jenkins file on the
school part under school -
as you can see on the companion
repository on github the code explained
in this video is included in this file
so there is no need to type it finally
click on save and then on build now the
pipeline starts
you will soon notice that because we
added some extra steps in the pipeline
the previous stage view is reset in
order to display the additional steps
as usual you can inspect the log for
each step
you can see the output of the stage test
unit test with the successful test
if any of the stage breaks the pipeline
will stop and the build will break
here you can see the output for the
stage run UAT death finally the pipeline
completes successfully and we can double
check that our web application with the
funny kittens is up and running on both
the dev environment
and the staging environment
this is the end of this video where we
added unit tests and user acceptance
tests to the CD pipeline and deployed
the web application to a staging
environment watch the next video where
we will add steps to manually approve a
deployment and deploy to a live
environment